![](.//media/CabeceraDocumentosMD.png)

# Hércules Backend ASIO. EF2.1-7. Métricas FAIR I- software y documentación de métricas

Contents
========

[**1.** **Introducción**](#1--introducción)

[**1.1.** **Aplicación de los principios FAIR en HERCULES-ASIO**](#11-aplicación-de-los-principios-fair-en-hercules-asio)

[**2.** **Metodología para la implementación de las métricas FAIR**](#2-metodología-para-la-implementación-de-las-métricas-fair)

[**2.1.** **Especificación del módulo de métricas FAIR para evaluación
automatizada de los recursos (ontologías o datos)**](#21-especificación-del-módulo-de-métricas-fair-para-evaluación-automatizada-de-los-recursos-ontologías-o-datos)

[**2.2.** **Estado del proyecto FAIRmetrics y análisis de su
repositorio**](#22-estado-del-proyecto-fairmetrics-y-análisis-de-su-repositorio)

[**2.3.** **Decisión de la estrategia de implementación y evaluación de
políticas FAIR**](#23-decisión-de-la-estrategia-de-implementación-y-evaluación-de-políticas-fair)

[**3.** **Implementación del Bridge API RESTful**](#3-implementación-del-bridge-api-restful)

[**3.1.** **Implementación del puente entre ASIO y FAIRMetrics**](#31-implementación-del-puente-entre-asio-y-fairmetrics)

[**3.2.** **Instalación y configuración del puente ASIO-FAIRmetrics**](#32-instalación-y-configuración-del-puente-asio-fairmetrics)

[**4.** **Conclusión**](#4-conclusión)

[**Bibliografía**](#bibliografía)

[**Apéndice 1. Métricas FAIR en HERCULES-ASIO**](#apéndice-1-métricas-fair-en-hercules-asio)

**1- Introducción** 
===================

El objetivo de este documento es "Definir y desarrollar un módulo de
métricas FAIR para evaluación automatizada de los recursos (ontologías o
datos)".

Recordemos que los principios FAIR\[1\] (Findable, Accesible,
Interoperable, Reusable) proporcionan directrices para la publicación de
recursos digitales tales como conjuntos de datos, códigos, flujos de
trabajo y objetos de investigación, de manera que sean localizables,
accesibles, interoperables y reutilizables (FAIR). Tales principios se
refieren a tres tipos de entidades: a) *datos* (o cualquier objeto
digital), b) *metadatos* (información sobre ese objeto digital) e c)
*infraestructura*. Por ejemplo, el principio "F4 -- (Meta)data are
registered or indexed in a searchable resource" define que tanto los
metadatos como los datos se registren o indexen en un recurso
encontrable (el componente de infraestructura).

En el entregable "EF2.1-6. DOCUMENTO DE ANÁLISIS DE MÉTODOS FAIR" se
realizó un análisis exhaustivo de las métricas FAIR y su aplicabilidad
al proyecto. El Apéndice 1 incluye el listado de las 14 métricas
descritas FAIR y su interpretación dentro de HERCULES-ASIO.

En las siguientes subsecciones ofrecemos, primero, el contexto en el que
se ubica este entregable y, en segundo lugar, exponemos lo que se ha
planteado exactamente dentro del módulo de métricas FAIR.

Este documento está en formato [PDF imprimible](https://github.com/HerculesCRUE/GnossDeustoBackend/blob/master/fair/Docs/EF2.1-7.%20M%C3%89TRICAS%20FAIR%20I-%20SOFTWARE%20Y%20DOCUMENTACI%C3%93N%20DE%20M%C3%89TRICAS.pdf).

**1.1. Aplicación de los principios FAIR en HERCULES-ASIO**
------------------------------------------------------

El objetivo principal del PT1 de este proyecto es crear la
infraestructura ontológica que describa los datos que almacenará el SGI
-- Sistema de Gestión de Investigación -- y que se concretará en la 'Red
de Ontologías Hércules' (ROH). Este PT tiene también la tarea de sentar
las bases y establecer los procedimientos, métricas y evaluación para
alinear el proyecto con los principios FAIR de cara tanto a la
publicación de las ontologías como a la publicación de datos.

Como resultado, este entregable describe un **sistema de comprobación
automatizado del nivel FAIR cumplido por los recursos publicados durante
el desarrollo del proyecto, que devuelve el nivel FAIR alcanzado,
asociado a la versión del proyecto y la fecha en la que se ejecutó la
comprobación**. La solución HERCULES-ASIO resultante debe ofrecer las
siguientes propiedades.

1.  Ofrecerá datos que sean *Findable* (Encontrables) a través de un
    identificador persistente e incluyendo metadatos

2.  *Accessible* (Accesible) a través del protocolo universal HTTP

3.  Interoperable usando vocabularios ampliamente adoptados y

4.  Reusable, se publican usando licencias de uso que promocionen la
    reusabilidad, como por ejemplo Creative Commons 4.0 BY-SA.

Hoy en día, la mejor manera de publicar datos FAIR es hacerlo mediante
Linked Data, teniendo especial cuidado de generar datos y metadatos de
alta calidad, mejorando así la reusabilidad de los datos para máquinas
(y, como consecuencia y en última instancia, para humanos).

El **Sistema de Comprobación FAIRness Automatizado en HERCULES-ASIO**,
descrito en este entregable, está diseñado para ser administrable desde
el propio back-end a través de una interfaz de web privada. Al igual que
el resto de componentes que desarrollaremos, tendrá una arquitectura SOA
(Service Oriented Architecture) que permitirá su reutilización desde
otros sistemas mediante llamadas a las funciones del API. También sería
reutilizable en otros proyectos adaptando el código publicado.

Este entregable es el segundo de los cuatro que abordan la alineación de
la solución propuesta con los principios FAIR:

1.  Análisis de métodos FAIR (Entregable: documento de análisis). Este
    es el documento presente. Entregado en diciembre 2019.

> **Entregable [EF2-1.6]**: documento de análisis de métodos
> FAIR

2.  Definir y desarrollar un módulo de métricas FAIR para evaluación
    automatizada de los recursos (ontologías o datos). Se trata del
    presente entegable.

> **Entregable [EF2-1.7]**: ***Métricas FAIR I- software y
> documentación de métricas***

3.  Publicar los resultados de ejecutar las métricas FAIR

> **Entregable [EF2-1.8a]**: Métricas FAIR II - Resultados
> publicados en la Web de la evaluación con métricas FAIR, versión 1
> (primer ciclo de desarrollo realizado - 80%). Fecha por determinar,
> desde Mayo 2020.
>
> **Entregable [EF2-1.8b]**: Métricas FAIR II - Resultados
> publicados en la Web de la evaluación con métricas FAIR, versión 2.
> Fecha por determinar, desde Mayo 2020.

Este entregable describe la creación de un *sistema automatizado de
comprobación de métricas FAIR que obtendrá información acerca del
cumplimiento de los principios FAIR*. La definición precisa de las
métricas se ha realizado en base a las métricas definidas en el proyecto
FAIR Metrics \[2\], \[3\] y en métricas adicionales definidas por la UTE
(pendientes de consideración).

Además de la obtención de las métricas FAIR descritas en el proyecto
FAIR Metrics \[2\], \[3\] proponemos que el sistema de comprobación
automatizado genere otros indicadores o métricas acerca del cumplimiento
de los principios FAIR, que serán especificadas al dominio SGI tras
haber primero abordado y garantizado que se ofrecen las 14 métricas
formuladas por FAIRmetrics.

**2. Metodología para la implementación de las métricas FAIR**
===========================================================

Esta sección describe el proceso seguido en la implementación del módulo
de verificación de las métricas FAIR para el proyecto HERCULES-ASIO.

La metodología aplicada para dar lugar a la primera versión de las
métricas FAIR para HERCULES-ASIO ha consistido en 3 pasos:

1.  Especificación del módulo de métricas teniendo en cuenta la
    especificación definida en el entregable EF2-1.6

2.  Evaluación del estado del proyecto FAIRmetrics y análisis de su
    repositorio de código fuente con la implementación de las métricas
    de referencia FAIR: <https://github.com/FAIRMetrics>

3.  Decisión de estrategia de implementación y evaluación de políticas
    FAIR tanto sobre la Red de Ontologías Hércules (ROH) como a los
    recursos modelados a partir de ROH.

**2.1 Especificación del módulo de métricas FAIR para evaluación automatizada de los recursos (ontologías o datos)**
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

El resultado final será la generación de un test-suite que evalúe las 14
métricas descritas en el entregable "EF2-1.6: documento de análisis de
métodos FAIR", así como otras adicionales, asociadas a los sistemas de
gestión de investigación, que surjan como resultado de plasmar este
modelo teórico de métricas en realidad y efectuar la validación del
grado de cumplimiento FAIR tanto de la red de ontologías como de los
recursos modelados sobre ella.

En el despliegue de la solución HERCULES-ASIO se ofrecerá un front-end
(interfaz de usuario) que **facilite el lanzamiento del test suite y la
generación de reportes que informen sobre el grado de cumplimiento de
las métricas FAIR**. Nótese que este front-end web no es parte del
entregable actual. Será proporcionando junto con el back-end de ASIO.
Previsiblemente en verano de 2020.

Es importante remarcar que la entrega actual aporta una interfaz
programática y accesible vía web siguiendo el estándar OpenAPI\[4\].
Además, tales reportes **son archivados (históricos) para poder analizar
el compromiso a lo largo del tiempo de ROH con los principios FAIR**.

A continuación, se enumeran algunas propiedades cualitativas del sistema
de medición de FAIR diseñado:

-   Las métricas deben abordar la multidimensionalidad de los principios
    de FAIR y abarcar todos los tipos de objetos digitales.

-   Las métricas universales pueden complementarse con métricas
    adicionales específicas de los recursos que reflejen las
    expectativas de comunidades particulares. En este caso el dominio de
    las universidades y la gestión de la investigación.

-   Las métricas en sí mismas, y cualquier resultado derivado de su
    aplicación, deben ser FAIR. Por esa razón, siguiendo lo marcado por
    FAIRmetrics hemos adoptado la definición semántica de métricas que
    ya han efectuado los creadores de las métricas FAIR. Por ejemplo,
    <https://purl.org/fair-metrics/FM_R1.3>

-   La evaluación del cumplimiento de métricas será ejecutado sobre
    muestras significativas del ROH para así validar que los principios
    FAIR se siguen cumpliendo en el tiempo. El juego de ensayo elegido
    tomará una muestra significativa de cada una de las entidades
    modeladas en ROH para ejecutar los tests. Tal juego de ensayo será
    descrito y justificado en el entregable futuro EF2-1.8a.

-   Las evaluaciones de imparcialidad deben mantenerse actualizadas, y
    todas las evaluaciones deben ser versionadas, tener un sello de
    tiempo y ser accesibles al público. En la implementación actual de
    FAIRmetrics ya se mantiene un registro histórico de tests. Esta
    funcionalidad será extendida para permitir filtros más avanzados
    para visualizar resultados de evaluación de métricas FAIR. Tales
    extensiones en el módulo de medición de métricas FAIR serán
    entregados junto con EF2-1.8a.

-   Las evaluaciones de imparcialidad, presentadas como una simple
    visualización, serán una poderosa modalidad para informar a los
    usuarios y guiar el trabajo de los productores de recursos
    digitales. Se ofrecerá la capacidad en la solución HERCULES-ASIO
    para visualizar el histórico de cumplimiento de métricas FAIR
    fácilmente visualizable a través de una tabla donde las filas serán
    las fechas en las que ejecutaron los tests y las columnas el grado
    de cumplimiento de cada métrica. Se usarán códigos de colores
    siguiendo la metáfora del semáforo. Actualmente la API provista ya
    ofrece los datos para poder realizar esta visualizión web, que será
    parte de la entrega del back-end de HERCULES-ASIO.

-   El proceso de evaluación, y la evaluación de la imparcialidad
    resultante, deben diseñarse y difundirse de manera que incentiven
    positivamente a los proveedores de recursos digitales; es decir,
    deben considerar que el proceso es justo e imparcial y, además,
    deben beneficiarse de estas evaluaciones y utilizarlas como una
    oportunidad para identificar áreas de mejora.

-   La gobernanza de las métricas, y los mecanismos para evaluarlas,
    serán necesarios para permitir su evolución cuidadosa y abordar los
    desacuerdos válidos.

**2.2. Estado del proyecto FAIRmetrics y análisis de su repositorio**
---------------------------------------------------------------------

El repositorio de código en GitHub \[5\] para [FAIRmetrics](https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics) ofrece una
implementación de referencia para las métricas descritas en el artículo
seminal al respecto titulado "*A design framework and exemplar metrics
for FAIRness*" \[6\]. En tal repositorio, se ofrecen implementaciones
tanto en lenguaje Perl como en Ruby, siendo esta última la
implementación que está siendo mantenida por los creadores del
repositorio. La reciente (en el último mes) introducción de
modificaciones en la implementación de las métricas disponibles en Ruby
en el siguiente repositorio
(<https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests>)
demuestra que el proyecto sigue estando activo.

En el análisis del código disponible sobre las métricas se han seguido
los siguientes pasos:

1.  *Revisión del código fuente de las 14 métricas implementadas para
    entender su funcionamiento*:
    <https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests>.
    Tras este análisis se concluyó que las métricas están
    suficientemente bien implementadas para poder utilizarse, aunque es
    claro que habría que extenderlas en algunos apartados. Por ejemplo,
    actualmente hay soporte específico para algunos formatos de URIs
    ampliamente utilizados como DOI, pero no para algunos más concretos
    al ámbito científico como ORCID. En el apartado de estrategia se
    explica cómo se plantea realizar estas modificaciones.

2.  *Instalación del back-end en servidor donde se alojará el back-end
    de ASIO-HERCULES*. Trabajo todavía en curso. Se está instalando
    distribución disponible en:
    <https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/fairmetrics>.
    Se trata de una aplicación en Ruby on Rails que ofrece un back-end
    RESTful para bien programáticamente o a través de interfaz web
    acoplada a tal API RESTful, se puedan lanzar la evaluación de las
    métricas FAIR contra recursos.

3.  Uso a través de cliente programático y cliente de línea de comandos
    (CURL\[7\]) de la API ya desplegada de FAIRmetrics en Google App
    Engine \[7\]:
    [https://ejp-evaluator.appspot.com/FAIR\_Evaluator//](https://ejp-evaluator.appspot.com/FAIR_Evaluator/).
    Este paso nos ha permitido demostrar que la funcionalidad ofrecida
    por FAIRmetrics es correcta, aunque refleja el hecho esperable que
    la ejecución de las colecciones de test suites FAIR es costosa en
    tiempo, a menudo requiriendo varios minutos para su compleción. Esto
    se debe al hecho de que por cada recursos explorada es necesario
    varios accesos via HTTP a recursos enlazados.

4.  Uso del front-end web ya disponible en
    <https://fairsharing.github.io/FAIR-Evaluator-FrontEnd/>. Se ha
    contrastado cómo ya es posible ejecutar la validación de principios
    FAIR contra la API RESTful indicada en el anterior paso. Se ha
    evaluado el grado de cumplimiento de los principios FAIR sobre la
    red de ontologías Hércules (ROH). Además, también se ha validado
    contra recursos DOI. Por ejemplo, el resultado de realizar la
    evaluación contra ROH es disponible en:
    <https://fairsharing.github.io/FAIR-Evaluator-FrontEnd/#!/evaluations/3241>

5.  Se ha contactado con el equipo responsable del desarrollo de
    métricas FAIR, concretamente con Mark Wilkinson
    (<mark.wilkinson@upm.es>) para informar que queremos utilizar la
    solución Open Source FAIRmetrics. Hemos propuesto su validación,
    extensión y mejora adoptando los dos canales que la herramienta
    GitHub pone a disposición de los desarrolladores, esto es, a)
    emisión de issues y b) creación de pull requests.

6.  En nuestra conversación con el director del proyecto FAIRmetrics, se
    ha aclarado que es además posible crear nuevas métricas específicas
    al dominio de gestión de datos de la investigación a través de la
    compleción de [FAIR Maturity Indicator template](https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/blob/master/MaturityIndicators/MaturityIndicatorTemplate.md). Se pueden
    realizar extensiones a través de la provisión de un endpoint para
    tales nuevas métricas usando SmartAPI\[8\], extensión semántica de
    OpenAPI. Se ha acordado dialogar con autores de FAIRmetrics en caso
    de detectarse necesidad de ofrecer nuevas métricas, específicas a la
    gestión de información de investigación.
    
Por tanto, una vez revisado el proyecto FAIRMETRICS y su código fuente
se concluyó que las métricas están suficientemente bien implementadas 
para poder utilizarse, aunque es claro que podrían extenderse en algunos
apartados. Por ejemplo, actualmente hay soporte específico para algunos
formatos de URIs ampliamente utilizados como DOI, pero no para algunos 
más concretos al ámbito científico como ORCID. En el siguiente apartado 
de estrategia se explica cómo se plantea realizar estas modificaciones. 

**2.3. Decisión de la estrategia de implementación y evaluación de políticas FAIR**
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Se ha decidido crear un proxy/bridge API usando OpenAPI, que será
utilizada desde back-end HERCULES-ASIO para realizar validación de
recursos (resources) y de la red de ontologías como tal.

Tal API será ofrecida en primera instancia conectándose con API pública
ya desplegada por FAIRsharing, disponible en
<https://ejp-evaluator.appspot.com/FAIR_Evaluator/>.

La implementación de la API del módulo de métricas FAIR para la
evaluación automática de recursos, se ha realizado de tal modo que es
agnóstica al despliegue del back-end. La decisión del proyecto ha sido
reutilizar la implementación actual e incluso hacer uso del despliegue
de la misma. Sin embargo, es claro que al proyecto no le conviene tener
que depender de terceros para la ejecución de las métricas FAIR. Por
consiguiente, tan pronto esté disponible el entorno de despliegue del
back-end ASIO, será desplegada en la misma la actual implementación de
las métricas FAIR.

Es reseñable que existe ya un front-end web implementado, desplegado y
totalmente funcional en (<https://w3id.org/AmIFAIR>), así como
disponible su código fuente desde
<https://github.com/FAIRsharing/FAIR-Evaluator-FrontEnd>. Este código
será el punto de partida para la interfaz que desde el back-end ASIO se
realizará para simplificar el lanzamiento de la batería de tests de
recursos de muestra y la propia ontología ROH. Tal implementación usará
el código de ejemplo cliente ya disponible que se menciona.

En resumen, las decisiones adoptadas relativas a la implementación del
módulo de validación de métricas FAIR para HERCULES-ASIO han sido:

1.  Crear un reverse proxy o puente RESTful API que permite la
    comunicación entre clientes y la implementación desplegada de las
    métricas FAIR

2.  Desplegar el back-end de FAIR en servidor de desarrollo de
    HERCULES-ASIO y adaptar el reverse proxy RESTful API para que
    propague invocaciones a tal servidor.

3.  Realizar extensiones o corregir errores en la implementación actual
    de FAIRmetrics trasmitiendo las solicitudes de cambios bien a través
    de *issues* de modo documental o con modificaciones concretas de
    código a través de *pull requests*.

4.  Preparar una batería de pruebas incluyendo un conjunto de recursos
    modelados acorde con todas las entidades de ROH y también evaluar la
    propia ontología.

5.  Ejecutar de modo periódico la batería de pruebas y mantener un
    histórico de las ejecuciones y sus resultados asociados, permitiendo
    filtrar y visualizar los resultados históricos.

En el entregable actual se documenta el resultado del paso 1), ver
sección 3. Obsérvese que también se ha abordado parcialmente 5) ya que
se mantiene un registro de las evaluaciones realizadas en el tiempo. Los
pasos 2), 3) y 4) se completarán junto con la entrega del back-end
HERCULES-ASIO.

Un efecto lateral importante, como resultado de realizar la evaluación
FAIR de recursos en ROH será la generación de un conjunto
recomendaciones para hacer ROH y recursos asociados (y por ende otras
ontologías y recursos) compatible con políticas FAIR. Se poblará de este
modo el repositorio
<https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Your_Path_To_FAIRness/tree/master/MI_Test_Tutorials>
del proyecto FAIRmetrics, así ayudando a otras organizaciones en la
provisión de recursos online siguiendo las directrices FAIR.

**3. Implementación del Bridge API RESTful** 
=========================================

Tal como se ha mencionado en el punto 2, se ha decidido crear un bridge
o puente entre la API RESTful de FAIRmetrics ya desplegada en la nube
por los creadores de FAIRmetrics y el código cliente que se desarrollará
como parte del back-end de HERCULES-ASIO.

**3.1. Implementación del puente entre ASIO y FAIRMetrics**
------------------------------------------------------

La Figura 1 muestra la arquitectura del evaluador de métricas FAIR
diseñado para el proyecto HERCULES-ASIO. Tal como puede apreciarse, el
lado cliente, en la figura el front-end web de ASIO-HERCULES, a través
de comandos HTTP realiza llamadas sobre la API del bridge
ASIO-FAIRmetrics. Tales invocaciones son delegadas bien al despliegue
actual de FAIRmetrics en Google App Engine o al back-end de
ASIO-HERCULES. Tal como puede apreciarse, el back-end de ASIO-HERCULES
incluirá como uno de sus módulos el despliegue de la implementación de
FAIRmetrics.

![](.//media/image2_MetricasFAIR.png)

**Figura** **1**. Interfaz RESTful del bridge ROH-FAIR Metrics.

Las ventajas de crear este bridge son las siguientes:

1.  La API generada ofrece una interfaz sencilla consistente en 4
    métodos que permiten realizar las operaciones para poder automatizar
    las verificación de los principios FAIR dentro de ROH:

    a.  Recuperar las colecciones existentes de test suites FAIR a
        ejecutar

    b.  Ejecutar la colección de test suite seleccionada

    c.  Recuperar el histórico de evaluaciones ejecutadas por un
        investigador (ORCID)

    d.  Recuperar el resultado en detalle de la ejecución anterior de
        una colección de tests

2.  Es muy sencillo cambiar el back-end al que van redirigidas las
    peticiones asociadas a la ejecución de métricas FAIR, a través de un
    simple parámetro. De ese modo, este cambio se efectuará tan pronto
    sea desplegado el back-end de HERCULES-ASIO en la infraestructura de
    la Universidad de Murcia.

En la Figura 2 se muestra el front-end swagger del bridge creado, donde
pueden verse los cuatro métodos ofrecidos por la API:

![](.//media/image3_MetricasFAIR.png)

**Figura** **2**. Interfaz RESTful del bridge ROH-FAIR Metrics.

Los siguientes comandos ilustran cómo desde línea de comando
(herramienta CURL) o desde otras herramientas como Postman y por
supuesto, código fuente, se podría invocar tal API:

-   Recuperar las colecciones existentes de test suites FAIR a ejecutar:

```
curl -X GET \"http://localhost:8080/v1/collections\" -H \"accept:
application/json\"
```

-   Ejecutar la colección de test suite seleccionada:

```
curl -X POST
\"http://localhost:8080/v1/collections/5/evaluate?resource=10.1109%2FACCESS.2019.2952321&orcid=0000-0001-8055-6823&title=prueba\"
-H \"accept: application/json\"
```

-   Recuperar el histórico de evaluaciones ejecutadas por uninvestigador (ORCID):

```
curl -X GET \"http://localhost:8080/v1/evaluations\" -H \"accept:
*/*"
```

-   Recuperar el resultado en detalle de la ejecución anterior de una colección de tests:

```
curl -X GET \"http://localhost:8080/v1/evaluations/3263/result\" -H
\"accept: */*"
```

Finalmente, la Figura 3 muestra el resultado de ejecutar el método GET
/collections que retorna una colección JSON con todas las colecciones de
test suites registradas en FAIRmetrics.

![](.//media/image4_MetricasFAIR.png)

**Figura** **3**. Ejecución del método GET
[/collections](http://localhost:8080/v1/ui/#/operations/default/collections_get)
a través de la interfaz Swagger.

**3.2. Instalación y configuración del puente ASIO-FAIRmetrics**
-----------------------------------------------------------

Antes de instalar y ejecutar el puente ASIO-FAIRmetrics es primero
necesario definir las colecciones de tests de métricas FAIR que quieren
ser lanzadas. Tales colecciones de tests pueden ser configuradas usando
el front-end provisto por la implementación de FAIRmetrics, accesible a
través de <https://fairsharing.github.io/FAIR-Evaluator-FrontEnd/#!/>.
Tal implementación del front-end está actualmente conectado al end-point
desplegado en
[https://ejp-evaluator.appspot.com/FAIR\_Evaluator//](https://ejp-evaluator.appspot.com/FAIR_Evaluator/).
Esto significa que una vez cambiado el endpoint al servidor de
desarrollo de HERCULES-ASIO, la URL del servidor referenciado deberá
modificarse.

La Figura 4 muestra la interfaz web disponible para la configuración de
una batería de tests. Obsérvese que la caja de selección "Select
Maturity Indicators" permite la selección de cada uno de los tests
individuales que configurarán la batería de pruebas. La Figura 5 muestra
algunos de los posibles valores de métricas que puedan ser elegidas.

![](.//media/image5_MetricasFAIR.png)

**Figura** **4**. Interfaz para la definición de una colección de tests
FAIR.

![](.//media/image6_MetricasFAIR.png)

**Figura** **5**. Selección de métricas a incluir en batería de pruebas.

Una vez creada la colección de tests a ejecutar o bien identificado el
ID de aquella colección de tests a ejecutar se puede proceder a la
instalación del puente ASIO-FAIRmetrics. Obsérvese que por ejemplo la
métrica "6 -- All Maturity Indicator Tests as of May 8, 2019"
(<https://fairsharing.github.io/FAIR-Evaluator-FrontEnd/#!/collections/6>),
see Figura 6, incluye todos los tests definidos por el proyecto
FAIRmetrics.

El proceso a seguir para instalar y ejecutar el bridge sería el
siguiente:

1.  Descargar el código de
    <https://github.com/deustohercules/roh/tree/master/fair/bridge>

2.  Ejecutar los siguientes tres comandos para lanzar el bridge:

    `pipenv install`

    `pipenv Shell`

    `python app.py`

3.  Seguir las indicaciones de la sección 3.1 para ver ejemplos de uso
    de la API.

Para generar el front-end swagger hacer lo siguiente:

1.  Ejecutar comando: 

    `openapi-generator generate -i openapi.yaml -g python-flask -o codegen\_server/`

2.  Copiar los contenidos del fichero
    `codegen\_server/openapi\_server/controllers/default\_controller\_asio.py`
    al fichero automáticamente generado por openapi-generator
    `codegen\_server/openapi\_server/controllers/default\_controller.py`

3.  Ejecutar en directorio `codegen\_server/` el comando: 

    `python -m openapi\_server`

4.  Acceder en el navegador a la dirección
    `<http://localhost:8080/v1/ui/>`

5.  Probar la API a través de la interfaz Swagger generada

El fichero bridge/openapi.yaml contiene la especificación de la API del
bridge ASIO-FAIRmetrics acorde con OpenAPI 3.0

![](.//media/image7_MetricasFAIR.png)

**Figura** **6**. Detalle de métricas a evaluar dentro de colección de
tests 6 -- All Maturity Indicator Tests as of May 8, 2019.

La Figura 7 muestra el resultado de ejecutar las métricas FAIR definidas
en la colección 6 a un recurso representando una publicación (a través
de su DOI). Los detalles del resultado de haber ejecutado tal métrica
puede accederse en:
<https://fairsharing.github.io/FAIR-Evaluator-FrontEnd/#!/evaluations/3264>

![](.//media/image8_MetricasFAIR.png)

**Figura** **7**. Resultado de ejecutar la colección de tests 6 al
recurso DOI
[10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2952321](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2952321)
lanzado por investigador 0000-0001-8055-6823.

**4. Conclusión**
=================

Este documento ha descrito la implementación inicial de las métricas
FAIR, mediante la provisión de un puente o bridge entre el código del
proyecto HERCULES-ASIO y las métricas desarrolladas por el proyecto
FAIRmetrics. Esta primera implementación del evaluador de métricas FAIR
hace uso del código fuente open source de la implementación por
referencia de las métricas FAIR en el repositorio FAIRmetrics. El
objetivo es que durante el desarrollo del proyecto HERCULES-ASIO se
consiga lo siguiente:

-   Incrementar el grado de cumplimiento de las métricas FAIR tanto para
    la red de ontologías ROH como para los recursos modelado con ROH

-   Realizar extensiones de las métricas de FAIRmetrics para el dominio
    de investigación

-   Realizar contribuciones para la depuración de las métricas
    existentes, de ese modo, contribuyendo de vuelta al proyecto
    FAIRmetrics

-   Garantizar un despliegue autónomo de las métricas para asegurar la
    independencia del código de terceros.

Como trabajo futuro deberemos realizar lo siguiente:

-   Crear un cliente sobre interfaz web de HERCULES-ASIO

-   Ejecutar periódicamente tests FAIR y mantener histórico de tales
    ejecuciones.

**Bibliografía**
================

* [1] M. D. Wilkinson *et al.*, «The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship», *Scientific Data*, vol. 3, n.^o^ 1, pp. 1-9, mar. 2016, doi: 10.1038/sdata.2016.18.
* [2] Mark Wilkinson, Erik Schultes, Luiz Olavo Bonino, Susanna-Assunta Sansone, Peter Doorn, y Michel Dumontier, *FAIRMetrics/Metrics: FAIR Metrics, Evaluation results, and initial release of automated evaluator code*. Zenodo, 2018.
* [3] P. O. of the E. Union, «Turning FAIR into reality: final report and action plan from the European Commission expert group on FAIR data.», 26-nov-2018. [En línea]. Disponible en: https://op.europa.eu:443/en/publication-detail/-/publication/7769a148-f1f6-11e8-9982-01aa75ed71a1/language-en/format-PDF. [Accedido: 23-nov-2019].
* [4] «OpenAPI Specification | Swagger». [En línea]. Disponible en: https://swagger.io/specification/. [Accedido: 14-ene-2020].
* [5] «GitHub». [En línea]. Disponible en: https://github.com/. [Accedido: 14-ene-2020].
* [6] M. D. Wilkinson, S.-A. Sansone, E. Schultes, P. Doorn, L. O. Bonino da Silva Santos, y M. Dumontier, «A design framework and exemplar metrics for FAIRness»,*Scientific Data*, vol. 5, n.^o^ 1, pp. 1-4, jun. 2018, doi: 10.1038/sdata.2018.118.
* [7] «curl». [En línea]. Disponible en: https://curl.haxx.se/. [Accedido: 14-ene-2020].
* [8] «SmartAPI». [En línea]. Disponible en: https://smart-api.info/. [Accedido: 14-ene-2020].
* [9] «FAIRsharing». [En línea]. Disponible en: https://fairsharing.org/. [Accedido: 24-nov-2019].
* [10] «Home - schema.org». [En línea]. Disponible en: https://schema.org/. [Accedido: 24-nov-2019].

**Apéndice 1. Métricas FAIR en HERCULES-ASIO**
==============================================

![Fair table:](.//media/fair_table_1.png)
![Fair table:](.//media/fair_table_2.png)
![Fair table:](.//media/fair_table_3.png)
![Fair table:](.//media/fair_table_4.png)
![Fair table:](.//media/fair_table_5.png)
![Fair table:](.//media/fair_table_6.png)
![Fair table:](.//media/fair_table_7.png)
![Fair table:](.//media/fair_table_8.png)
![Fair table:](.//media/fair_table_9.png)
![Fair table:](.//media/fair_table_10.png)

<!-- 
| Principio FAIR                                                                                                 | Métrica/Explicación                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Especificación                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Verificación                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Findable                                                                                                       | FM-F1A. Identifier Uniqueness                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | An URL to a registered identifier scheme must be specified.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | URL to a registered identifier scheme must be present:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | An identifier scheme is valid if and only if it is described in a repository that can register and present such identifier schemes (e.g. fairsharing.org – a curated, informative and educational resource on data and metadata standards, inter-related to databases and data policies [9]).                                       | ·        A first version of this metric would focus on just checking a URL that resolves to a document.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| F1. (Meta)data are assigned a globally unique and persistent identifier                                        | The uniqueness of an identifier is a necessary condition to unambiguously refer that resource, and that resource alone. Otherwise, an identifier shared by multiple resources will confound efforts to describe that resource, or to use the ident to retrieve it.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | ·        A second version would indicate how to structure the data policy document with a section (similar to how the CC licenses now have a formal structure in RDF).                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | ·        A third version would insist that that document and section is signed by an approved organization and made available in an appropriate repository.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Tal como se reflejó en análisis de entidades efectuado en el “ANEXO I de la FASE I – Estudio de Viabilidad”, para cada entidad se ha explorado el formato del identificador único a usar, estableciéndose mapeos entre el esquema de URIs uniforme y unívoco propuesto para Hércules e identificadores estándar que ya existen (ORCID, DOI). La factoría de URIs en HERCULES también jugará un importante rol aquí, asegurando que las IDs generados sean únicos y también persistentes. Esta métrica garantizará que las URIs de un recurso y sus metadatos puedan ser resueltas correctamente.                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en HERCULES-ASIO?                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Findable                                                                                                       | FM-F1B. Identifier persistence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Providers of digital resources must ensure that they have a policy to manage changes in their identifier scheme, with a special emphasis on maintaining/redirecting previously generated identifiers.                                                                                                                               | Use an HTTP GET on URL provided. Present (a 200,202,203 or 206 HTTP response after resolving all and any prior redirects. e.g. 301 -> 302 -> 200 OK) or Absent (any other HTTP code). A first version of this metric would focus on just checking a URL that resolves to a document.                                                                                                |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | They must provide a URL that resolves to a document containing the relevant policy.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| F1. (Meta)data are assigned a globally unique and persistent identifier                                        | Whether there is a policy that describes what the provider will do in the event an identifier scheme becomes deprecated.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Muy relacionado con métrica FM-F1A. El ID asignado no sólo tiene que ser único, sino que también apunte de manera permanente a un recurso incluso cuando cambie el identificador. Este es un requisito importante que la Factoría de URIs y también el backend del SGI deben cumplir. La implementación inicial probará que la solución HERCULES-ASIO soporta el cambio de IDs de una entidad y que todavía se mantienen mapeos usando esquemas de URIs anteriormente puestos en marcha.                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en ASIO?                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Findable                                                                                                       | FM-F2. Machine-readability of metadata                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | A URL to a document that contains machine-readable metadata for the digital resource must be provided. Furthermore, the                                                                                                                                                                                                             | HTTP GET on the metadata URL. A response of [a 200,202,203 or 206 HTTP response after resolving all and any prior redirects. e.g. 301 -> 302 -> 200 OK] indicates that there is indeed a document. The second URL should resolve to the record of a registered fi                                                                                                                   |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | file format must be specified.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | le format (e.g. DCAT, DICOM, schema.org etc.) in a registry like FAIRsharing. Possible valid results will be: a) Machine-readable or b) Machine-not-readable                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| F2. Data are described with rich metadata                                                                      | The availability of machine-readable metadata that describes a digital resource. This metric is intended to test the format of the metadata since machine readability of metadata makes it possible to optimize discovery. For instance, Web search engines suggest the use of structured metadata elements to optimize search. Thus, the machine-readability aspect can help people and machines and a digital resource of interest.                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Para asegurarnos que ROH cumple está métrica es imprescindible que cada concepto representado ofrezca una URL apuntando a sus metadatos y que éstos estén en formatos estándar como DCAT – Data Catalogue Vocabulary[1] o Schema.org [10]. ROH será un catálogo de datasets de investigación, donde tanto el grafo de conocimiento per sé  (dcat:Catalog) como cada dataset (dcat:Dataset) en particular serán descritos a través del vocabulario DCAT. Cada concepto definido en ROH debe proporcionar una propiedad rdf:type que vincule a cada entidad con una rdfs:Class. Además, la procedencia de los elementos será declarada explícitamente a través de propiedades de la ontología PROV-O.  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en ASIO?                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Findable                                                                                                       | FM-F3. Resource Identifier in Metadata                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | The GUID[2] of the metadata and the GUID of the digital resource it describes, must be provided. For this to happen, the metadata must explicitly contain the identifier for the digital resource it describes, and this should be present in the form of a qualified reference, indicating some manner of "about" relationship, to | Parsing the metadata for the given digital resource GUID. If the GUID/UUID of the referred digital resource is present or absent.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | distinguish this identifier from the numerous others that will be present in the metadata.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | In addition, since many digital objects cannot be arbitrarily extended to include references to their metadata, in many cases, the only means to discover the metadata related to a digital object will be to search based on the GUID of the digital object itself.                                                                                                                |
| F3. Metadata clearly and explicitly include the identifier of the data they describe                           | The discovery of a digital object should be possible from its metadata. This metric checks whether the metadata document contains the globally unique and persistent identifier for the digital resource.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Íntimamente ligada a FM-F2, requiere que las conexiones entre recursos digitales y metadatos sean bidireccionales. En este caso, FM-F3 evalúa si desde los metadatos se puede llegar a los datos del recurso digital modelado. Por lo tanto, en ROH los metadatos de una entidad tienen que apuntar de vuelta necesariamente al recurso descrito incluyendo como valor la URI única y persistente del recurso digital.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en HERCULES-ASIO?                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Findable                                                                                                       | FM-F4. Indexed in a searchable resource                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | The ability to discover a resource should be tested using a) its identifier, b) other text-based metadata.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | We perform an HTTP GET on the URLs provided and attempt to find the persistent identifier in the page that is returned. A second step might include following each of the top N hits and examine the resulting documents for presence of the identifier. The result will be true when the persistent identifier was found in the search results.                                    |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| F4. (Meta)data are registered or indexed in a searchable resource                                              | The degree to which the digital resource can be found using web-based search engines. Most people use a search engine to initiate a search for a particular digital resource of interest. If the resource or its metadata are not indexed by web search engines, then this would substantially diminish an individual's ability to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Taking as input the persistent identifier of the resource, perform search in the web and verify that pages pointing to the resource are returned.                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                | find and reuse it.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Dada la URI de un recurso digital en ROH, deberemos extraer las URIs que apuntan a sus metadatos y realizar búsquedas con buscadores de Internet para explorar sus primeros resultados y determinar si se devuelven enlaces al GUID del recurso buscado y sus metadatos. Esta misma funcionalidad de búsqueda debería ser disponible a través de las herramientas de búsqueda de HERCULES-ASIO.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en HERCULES-ASIO?                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Accessible                                                                                                     | FM-A1.1. Access Protocol                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | This metric should supply:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Do an HTTP get on the URL to see if it returns a valid document. Ideally, we would have a universal database of communication protocols from which we can check this URL. The HTTP GET on the URL should return a 200,202,203 or 206 HTTP response after resolving all and any prior redirects. e.g. 301 - 302 - 200 OK. The other two should return true/false ("true" is success) |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | ·        A URL to the description of the protocol                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| A1. (Meta)data are retrievable by their identifier using a standardised communications protocol                | The nature and use limitations of the access protocol. Access to a resource may be limited by the specified communication protocol. In particular, we are worried about access to technical specifications and any costs associated with implementing the protocol. Protocols that are closed source or that have royalties associated with them could prevent users from being able to obtain the resource.                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | ·        true/false as to whether the protocol is open source                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| A1.1 - the protocol is open, free, and universally implementable                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | ·        true/false as to whether the protocol is (royalty) free                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | En ASIO, los identificadores utilizados serán resolubles a través de HTTP/s. Es decir, apuntan a recursos cuyos metadatos son devueltos a través de comandos HTTP (GET) en diferentes formatos atendiendo a la capacidad de negociación de contenidos del paradigma REST, que se basa en la cabecera Content-Type, pudiendo ser servidor en formatos estándar como RDF/XML, Turtle, RDFa o JSON-LD, dependiendo de la cabecera Accept de la petición HTTP. Uno de los componentes de ASIO es un servidor Linked Data que contestaría con datos en respuesta a una URI, en el formato indicado en la petición.                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en HERCULES-ASIO?                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Accessible                                                                                                     | FM-A1.2. Access authorization                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | The outcomes of this metric should be:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Computational validation of the data provided. A valid answer contains a true or false for the first question.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | ·        true/false concerning whether authorization is needed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | If true, an HTTP GET on the URL provided should return a 200, 202, 203, or 206 HTTP Response after resolving all redirects.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| A1. (Meta)data are retrievable by their identifier using a standardised communications protocol                | Specification of a protocol to access restricted content. Not all content can be made available without restriction. For instance, access and distribution of personal health data may be restricted by law or by organizational policy. In                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | ·        a URL that resolves to a description of the process to obtain access to restricted content.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| A1.2 - the protocol allows for an authentication and authorization procedure, where necessary                  | such cases, it is important that the protocol by which such content can be accessed is fully specified.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | En HERCULES-ASIO, se usarán HTTPS para incrementar la seguridad en la comunicación, adoptándose OAuth para la autenticación y autorización de acceso a recursos. Esta métrica evaluará que sólo usuarios autorizados podrán acceder a los recursos digitales que requieren autorización.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en HERCULES-ASIO?                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Accessible                                                                                                     | FM-A2. Metadata Longevity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | This metric must verify the existence of an URL to a formal metadata longevity plan.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Resolve the URL checking:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | ·        Successful resolution                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| A2 - metadata are accessible, even when the data are no longer available                                       | The existence of metadata even in the absence/removal of Data. Cross-references to data from third-party's FAIR data and metadata will naturally degrade over time and become “stale links". In such cases, it is important for FAIR providers to continue to provide descriptors of what the data was to assist in the continued interpretation of those third-party data. As per FAIR Principle F3, this meta-data remains discoverable, even in the absence of the data, because it contains an explicit reference to the IRI of the data.                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | ·        Returns a document that represents a plan or policy of some kind                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | ·        Preferably certified (e.g. DSA)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | En el back-end de HERCULES-ASIO verificaremos que, aunque algunos recursos digitales dejen de existir, todavía sus metadatos sean recuperables.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en HERCULES-ASIO?                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Interoperable                                                                                                  | FM-I1. Use a Knowledge Representation Language                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | URL to the specification of the language                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | BNF (or other?) found, Media-type of the document is                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                                                                                                                | Use of a formal, accessible, shared, and broadly applicable language for knowledge representation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | ·        The language must have a BNF (or other specification language)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | registered in FAIRSharing.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| I1 - (meta)data use a formal, accessible, shared, and broadly applicable language for knowledge representation |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | ·        The URL resolves (accessible)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Future: FAIRSharing has tags to indicate constrained vs. extendable languages?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|                                                                                                                | The unambiguous communication of knowledge and meaning (what symbols are, and how they relate to one another) necessitates the use of languages that are capable of representing these concepts in a machine-readable manner.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | ·        The document has an IANA media-type[3] (i.e. it is sufficiently widely accepted and shared that it has been registered)                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | ·        The language can be arbitrarily extended (e.g. PDBml can be used to represent knowledge, but only about proteins)                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | En HERCULES-ASIO, los metadatos se expresarán según el lenguaje estándar de la web semántica Ontology Web Language, OWL. Se hará un uso extensivo de Ontologías ampliamente utilizadas por terceros (como por ejemplo FOAF, Dublin Core o schema.org) lo que garantizará la interoperabilidad entre nuestro grafo de conocimiento ROH y otros externos. Además, los metadatos serán exportados en diferentes serializaciones de RDF como RDF/XML, JSON-LD o Turtle. Revisaremos las ontologías reutilizadas a lo largo del tiempo y contrastaremos que ROH en una gran mayoría (>80%) está basado en ontologías conocidas y ampliamente probadas.                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en HERCULES-ASIO?                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Interoperable                                                                                                  | FM-I2. Use FAIR Vocabularies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | IRIs representing the vocabularies used for (meta)data must be provided.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Resolve IRIs, check FAIRness of the returned document(s).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|                                                                                                                | The metadata values and qualified relations should themselves be FAIR, for example, terms from open, community-accepted vocabularies published in an appropriate knowledge-exchange format.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| I2 - (meta)data use vocabularies that follow FAIR principles                                                   | Data, and the provenance descriptors of the data, should (where reasonable) use vocabularies and terminologies that are, themselves, FAIR.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Successful resolution; document is amenable to machine-parsing and identification of terms within it. It may be possible to use FAIRSharing to validate these vocabularies.                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | En HERCULES-ASIO, se va a crear una red de ontologías (ROH) basada en ontologías ampliamente aceptadas. Tales ontologías van a ser enlazadas entre ellas para asegurar su interoperabilidad. Se respetarán las licencias de uso y reutilización de cada una de ellas, reconociendo la autoría inicial de las mismas a través de relaciones basadas en la ontología PROV-O. Esta métrica deberá verificar que los vocabularios adoptados para modelar conocimiento son FAIR por sí mismos.                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en HERCULES-ASIO?                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Interoperable                                                                                                  | FM-I3. Use Qualified References                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Linksets (in the formal sense) representing part or all of your resource must be provided.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | The linksets must have qualified references. At least one of the links must be in a different Web domain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|                                                                                                                | Relationships within (meta)data, and between local and third-party data, have explicit and 'useful' semantic meaning.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | (or the equivalent of a different namespace for non-URI identifiers)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| I3 - (meta)data include qualified references to other                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | ·        References are qualified                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| (meta)data                                                                                                     | For Interoperability, the relationships within and between data must be more semantically rich than “is (somehow) related to".                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | ·        Qualities are beyond “ref" or “is related to”                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | ·        One of the cross-references points outwards to a distinct Namespace                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|                                                                                                                | Numerous ontologies include richer relationships that can be used for this purpose, at various levels of domain-specificity. For example, the use of SKOS for terminologies (e.g. exact matches) references/relations point outwards to other resources, owned by third-parties; this is one of the requirements for 5 star linked data.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | En HERCULES-ASIO, siguiendo el enfoque de Linked Data nuestras ontologías y las instancias de las mismas estarán enlazadas a otras ontologías y recursos de grafos externos (Wikidata, DBpedia), respectivamente. Esta métrica evaluará que la mayoría de las relaciones sean específicas al dominio y no genéricas (ej. related_to frente a child_of), cuando enlacen las diferentes entidades modeladas en el grafo resultante.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en HERCULES-ASIO?                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Reusable                                                                                                       | FM-R1.1. Accessible Usage License                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | The IRI of the license (e.g. its URL) for the data license and for the metadata license must be provided.                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Resolve the IRI(s) using its associated resolution protocol.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|                                                                                                                | The existence of a license document, for BOTH (independently) the data and its associated metadata, and the ability to retrieve those documents. A core aspect of data reusability is the ability to determine, unambiguously and with relative ease, the conditions under which you are allowed to reuse the (meta)data. Thus, FAIR data providers must make these terms openly available. This applies both to data (e.g. for the purpose of third-party integration with other data) and for metadata (e.g. for the purpose of third-party indexing or other administrative metrics) |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Valid result: A document containing the license information                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| R1. Meta(data) are richly described with a plurality of accurate and relevant attributes                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| R1.1 - (meta)data are released with a clear and accessible                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| data usage license                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | En ASIO, la red de ontologías Hércules (ROH) resultante tendrá una licencia Creative Commons 4.0 BY-SA. Se verificará que las ontologías conectadas en esta red dispongan todas ellas de una licencia compatible. Además, las ontologías importadas serán enriquecidas con descripciones semánticas, a través de las propiedades dc:rights y dc:license, del vocabulario Dublin Cored.  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en HERCULES-ASIO?                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Reusable                                                                                                       | FM-R1.2. Detailed Provenance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Several IRIs - at least one of these points to one of the vocabularies used to describe citational provenance (e.g.                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | We resolve the IRI according to their associated protocols.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|                                                                                                                | That there is provenance information associated with the data, covering at least two primary types of provenance information:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | dublin core). At least one points to one of the vocabularies (likely domain-specific) that is used to describe contextual provenance (e.g. EDAM)                                                                                                                                                                                    | In the future, we may be able to cross-reference these with FAIRSharing to confirm that they are "standard", and perhaps even distinguish citation vs. domain specific                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| R1. Meta(data) are richly described with a plurality of accurate and relevant attributes                       | ·        Who/what/When produced the data (i.e. for citation)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                | ·        Why/How was the data produced (i.e. to understand context and relevance of the data). Reusability is not only a technical issue; data can be discovered, retrieved, and even be machine-readable, but still not be reusable in any rational way. Reusability goes beyond “can I reuse this data?" to other important questions such as “may I reuse this data?", “should I reuse this data", and “who should I credit if I decide to use it?"                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | IRI 1 should resolve to a recognized citation provenance standard such as Dublin Core.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| R1.2 - (meta)data are associated with detailed provenance                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | IRI 2 should resolve to some vocabulary that itself passes basic tests of FAIRness                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | En HERCULES-ASIO, se hará uso de la ontología PROV-O (https://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o) para declarar explícitamente la procedencia de las ontologías y sus atributos y datos de instancia reutilizados.  Esta métrica comprobará que se ha declarado provenance de cada vocabulario incorporado en ROH.                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en HERCULES-ASIO?                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Se reutilizará y extenderán [2] scripts disponibles en Ruby en https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/tree/master/MetricsEvaluatorCode/Ruby/metrictests.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Reusable                                                                                                       | FM-R1.3. Meets Community Standards                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | A certification saying that the resource is compliant should be provided.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Validate the electronic signature as coming from a community authority (e.g. a Verisign signature). Successful signature validation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|                                                                                                                | Certification, from a recognized body, of the resource meeting community standards. Various communities have recognized that maximizing the usability of their data requires them to adopt a set of guidelines for metadata (often in the form of “minimal information about. . . " models). Non-compliance with these standards will often render a dataset `reuseless' because critical information about its context or provenance is missing.                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| R1. Meta(data) are richly described with a plurality of accurate and relevant attributes                       | However, adherence to community standards does more than just improve reusability of the data. The software used by the community for analysis and visualization often depends on the (meta)data having certain fields; thus, non-compliance with standards may result in the data being unreadable by its associated tools. As such, data should be (individually) certified as being compliant, likely through some automated process (e.g. submitting the data to the community's online validation service)                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Such certification services may not exist, but this principle serves to encourage the community to create both the standard(s) and the verification services for those standards.                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| R1.3 - (meta)data meet domain-relevant community standards                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | En HERCULES-ASIO, esta métrica es de difícil verificación automática, será evaluada por la revisión manual de la ontología resultante por expertos y la evaluación de la usabilidad de la misma por los usuarios de ROH. Se prepararán cuestionarios que evalúen que ROH cumple las convenciones del dominio de los sistemas de gestión de investigación, sigue estándares y además corresponde con una ontología fácilmente interoperable y usable. |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| ¿Cómo es abordada en HERCULES-ASIO?                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| [1] https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-dcat-2/                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| [2] http://guid.one/guid                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| [3] https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
-->

En la siguiente tabla se detallan los tests ejecutados en relación con las métricas FAIR y su resultado:

![Fair test table:](.//media/fair_test_table_1.png)
![Fair test table:](.//media/fair_test_table_2.png)


[^1]: <https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics>

[^2]: <https://github.com/FAIRMetrics/Metrics/blob/master/MaturityIndicators/MaturityIndicatorTemplate.md>

[^3]: <https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-dcat-2/>

[^4]: <http://guid.one/guid>

[^5]: <https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml>

[^6]: <https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-dcat-2/>

[^7]: <http://guid.one/guid>

[^8]: <https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml>
<!-- ==============================================>

